---
yaml_begin: true
title: 2020-06-07 no tv
description: 
extract: 
created: 2024-11-17 17:08
updated: 2025-02-14 22:04
author: tb
images: 
order: 
enableToc: "true"
permalink: 
aliases: 
draft: "false"
publish: "true"
date: 2020-06-07
tags:
  - television
  - media
  - film
  - cinema
yaml_end: true
---

For a series of pretty random reasons, I stopped paying attention to TV in 1980 — and for a decade and a half put up with lots of angry bullsh\*t about how I was elitist etc, etc. Whatever, anyway, I really only started paying attention to it again about 6 or 7 years ago, by which time it had become impossibly abstract — not really TV anymore, much as “stereos” became irrelevant for music . But in that time, I became a binge-reader: rather than a novel here or ther, I’d read everything some author ever wrote. And now that I watch “TV” again, it’s the same: I’m less interested in watching 2-hour movies than in what’s come to be called “bingeing.” (My first binge-watch: Fassbinder’s *Berlin Alexanderplatz* in 1983/4, watched all 16.5 hrs of it three times in a week. In the theater.) SO. So now I should watch posh, high-Kultur films I guess, but mainly I want to immerse myself in a world, however good or bad. It’s like reading Dickens: it can go on forever. So, for me, series are the thing. I just caught up with *Ozark*, and watched it until the end. A funny combination of stunning and hilarious. Mostly very good. Since I watch things on an iPad, I’m constantly interrupting the experience, so it just becomes a kind of background amusement that, occasionally, is absorbing. I found myself stringing out the last episode of the latest season for days because I knew how it would end. Why? Because they want another season, so they can’t kill off central characters. And indeed.
