---
yaml_begin: true
title: 2003-10-06 on american anti intellectualism
description: 
extract: 
created: 2024-11-17 17:08
updated: 2026-01-20 12:25
author: "tb"
images: false
order: 
enableToc: 
permalink: 
aliases: 

publish: 
date: 2003-10-06
tags:
  - education
  - europe
  - language
  - media
  - philosophy
  - intellectualism
yaml_end: true
---

To: Nettime-l
Subject: Re: <nettime> New Media Education and Its Discontent
From: t byfield
Date: [Mon, 6 Oct 2003 02:12:06 -0400](https://nettime.org/Lists-Archives/nettime-l-0310/msg00035.html)

Trebor Scholz (Sat 10/04/03 at 04:32 PM -0400):

> New Media Education and Its Discontent

there’s something hilarious about the proposition that, were it not for andrew jackson — author, they say, of the quintessentially all-american ‘OK’ (‘oll korekt!’) — this country would be more inclined love its intellectuals. in the service of this theory, examples are offered which assume that what’s needed most in the discursive prisoners who are our ‘leaders’ — the figureheads who sit atop baroque administrative empires — isn’t ‘personality’ but, rather, intellect. one needn’t endorse the outcomes of recent or current elections to be skeptical about that argument. reigning in these vast apparatuses requires an ‘unproblematized’ attitude toward exercising power, but over the last few decades american intellectuals (such as they are) have devoted staggering amounts of energy to ‘problematizing’ power from every perspective — and then they wonder why they have so little of the damn stuff. hey, we’ve got to blame *someone* for this sorry state of affairs, so let’s pick on a dead white autodidact autocrat who ‘hated...Jews, homosexuals and immigrants’! uh, but he died twenty years before the civil war. ‘yeah, well, it *would* take a lot of time for his ideology to propagate, wouldn’t it?!’

the plaint that intellectuals don’t get the respect they deserve emanates, of course, from those who would ‘be’ intellectuals. i’m not sure what that’s supposed to entail (and it’d be hard to find a better way to describe what i’ve been doing for the last decade and a half), but in the specific context given (the classroom) the telltale signs of anti-intellectualism were diagnosed as ‘not reading assignments, not contributing to class discussion, complaining about a high work load, skipping class, giving low evaluations to instructors with high standards, not bothering to do extra work, [and] by dispassionately condemning intellectual debate as “boring.”’ luckily, the obvious response — that in some very intellectual circles these signs would be seen as a healthy disregard for the authoritarian hypocrisy of the classroom — was saved by the bell, as it were: a pious invocation of bell hooks, untertheorist of self-consciously intellectual cant about ‘sites of resistance.’

weirdly, though, in trebor’s recount, the people doing all this ‘resisting’ in the classroom seem to be the teachers, not the students. like many mysterious inversions of logic, the truth of this proposition is hidden in plain sight: in a classroom, students *do* rule —directly, through sheer number, and indirectly, through procedures such as teacher evaluations (which definitely weren’t developed by anti-intellectuals). and how, he asks, can teachers be ‘courageous’ when those darned students get to speak their mind out-of-band, as it were, by saying mean stuff about teach to the boss? faced with this plight, the teacher’s ‘resistance’ consists in part, he suggests, of being ‘transformed.’ maybe i’m missing something, but none of the best teachers i ever had — in studying quite classical disciplines — were transformed in the course of a semester; they did, however, know exactly what they were teaching. iirc, their personal odyssey didn’t play a big part in the syllabus, which mainly focused on transforming students from people who didn’t know something into people who did.

trebor claims that ‘Media Study Departments bring together the most relevant sources of knowledge.’ this may be so, but that assumption is hardly the clearest basis for constructing a curriculum, let alone a syllabus. those tasks are much more banal, involving as they do the orderly presentation (and, over the years, repetition) of whatever ‘knowledge’ is being supposed to be imparted. a field founded on the presumption that it’s the bee’s knees is likely to have a hard time explaining in plain terms (which students do tend to appreciate) what exactly is being taught. ‘relevance’? ‘sources of knowledge’? ‘cultural theory, and literature to technical skill, from the vocational to the conceptual’? could it be that media studies, however ‘relevant,’ doesn’t constitute a coherent field, discipline, or object capable of sustaining a disciplinary structure that supports sustained inquiries into Intellectualism and Art? could it be that the students are responding sensibly to a lack of clarity? that their ‘careerism’ is less ‘anti-intellectual’ than a pragmatic and affirmative request for the department to please explain how they’re supposed to make a living with all these high-minded values? the (old-school) answer could well be, ‘well, if you’re smart enough to ask that question we trust that you’ll be smart enough do what you’re going to have to do anyway, namely, figure it out for yourselves.’ that’d be honest; but then the line of inquiry would shift very quickly from top-down Art and Intellectualism to bottom-up What the F———?. which would be an excellent start for a real transformation — of departmental assumptions, for starters.

personally — and i just graduated from teaching in a TAZish graduate ‘design and technology’ department to running an established undergrad design department — i don’t have much patience with the idea that students are ‘customers’ who can fickly demand their money’s worth in some microcontextual controversy. however, i have boundless patience with the idea that each new wave of students presents a new macro-context that should force us to define once again the worth of what we teach, according to variable variables ranging from ‘first principles’ to the speculative State of Things they’ll contend with when they graduate. ymmv, but cultural theory, literature, technical skill, the vocational, and the conceptual seem more like meta-evaluations of a curriculum than a curriculum per se. i’d be very happy if, in a few years, students came back and said ‘you taught us cultural theory and literature!’ — but i’d be less receptive to a proposal for a course that focused on these things. that’s hardly an anti-intellectual stance. and we don’t really need geert to tell us that we need (these are trebor’s words, i think) ‘problematic, off-track courses [that] provide skills that last much longer than the software applications or programming languages of the day’ — as if the implied caricature accurately described the aims of the departments and teachers in question. after all, our american anti-intellectual tradition has conjured up a few oddities like horace mann, for example, who through sheer force of (gasp!) Individual Will impressed upon vast numbers the idea that educators should teach people the skills they need to teach themselves. (he died ~15 years after andrew jackson, btw, and left a much greater theoretical and practical mark on american education than the president ever could have.)

it isn’t every day that i sympathize with rumsfeld, but trebor’s mini-essay did the trick — but mainly because the dichotomy it set up, between (european, one assumes) Art and Intellectualism, on the one hand, and the anti-intellectualism and careerism of (american) students, on the other, more than merely smacked of a too-easy america-versus-old-europe debate. denouncing american ‘anti-intellectualism’ on this list and its neighborhood is a snap. what’s harder — *much* harder — is identifying the native genius of american thought in order to tailor one’s teaching to, yes, Actual Students. talk about ‘false localism’ would be much more convincing if it actually attended to the messy details of *american* localism, rather than the convenient whipping boy of mass-mediated representations, which are to america what the BBC lady is to the british accent.

if you want to know about the origins of anti-intellectualism in america, then get thee to a library and read a good book on the subject — say, t. j. jackson lears’s *no place of grace: anti-modernism and the trabsformation of american culture* is a good place to start (and it’s cheaper now that it’s gone back into print). but lears is a southerner, so his take on ‘america’ doesn’t quite line up with yankee norms, which of course is what these discussions of ‘america’ are *really* about, n’est pas? not about the Deep South where, according to yankee psycho-cartography, there be dragons; not about the mysteriously ill-defined ‘midwest’ which we all know is just one big picasso-like context-free cornfield peppered with the occasional hick in overalls chewing on straw and mumbling ‘yup...’; not about all that dry whatever Out West with its pesky suburban cowboy philosophers; and not about those left-coast freaks who, like, are *totally* intew fluidity, you know, like, with their ((hang|surf| skate|wind|snow)(board|skate|glid|sail)ing) and TM (meditation? equity? whoa, d00d!) ‘n’ stuff. but, like, if you’d rather do some field ethnography than dusty archival reading, you can always do as the romans do: road trip!!! rest assured, you’ll find that americans are a very philosophical lot. ‘intellectual’ maybe not, but philosophical yes. with a little luck, you’ll also discover that combing america for Intellectuals is a bit like combing the trobriand islands for painters in the style of hans memling. you won’t find any, but that’s not their fault. and it definitely doesn’t mean that they aren’t thinking, or that what they *are* thinking is in any way inferior to a presumptuous nostalgia for Art and Intellectualism.

the irony of this all is that most ‘new media’ programs — as in the ones suffering from discontents (and they certainly do, in large part because their terrain is ageing ‘in internet years’) — are more akin to polytechnic programs than humanities departments. as such, they *do* tend to be more practical than philosophical in their orientation. but many among their faculty were weaned on new-economy expectations about their own careers and therefore tend to see themselves in terms that are more philosophical than practical. as a result, i suspect that many of the discontents diagnosed stem not from students but, rather, from the teachers for whom the faithless description ‘training HTML slaves’ seems downwardly mobile in a bitter and recursive way. how exactly one expects to teach ‘new media’ without regard for such basic *crafts* is beyond me, just as it’s hard to understand how one would expect to teach ‘old media’ without attending to the intimate details of typography, editorial design, printing, and their analogs in audio, video, object, space, wayfinding, and so on. it makes no sense to work in such a field yet regard its fundamental practices with contempt. that’s why it’s such a pleasure to deal with a ‘mere’ design department, for which philosophy would be — had it not already been so for decades — an ever-present step *up*, and one that students accustomed to *making* things (within a very coherent discipline) appreciate. their philosophizing may not be up to snuff with the state of the art in the humanities; but that’s fine, because the state of the humanities in the US is pretty pathetic — a recursively reflexive business that has yet to fully grok how the fact of its shrinking share of the overall the higher-ed graduate market is itself undermining the vigor and ‘relevance’ of the work it produces. on the other side, the philosophies at play in design may be ‘applied,’ but only from the purist realm of Theory could ‘applied’ be a pejorative. if the ‘elite’ status of the non-applied made its proponents feel better (or ‘whatever,’ as us americans say), fine, but is it? when concerns about teaching in a particular mode or context lead to diagnoses of rampant anti-intellectualism, my guess is that it isn’t.

cheers,
t
