---
title: 2011 > some nettime essay...
description:
extract:
created: 2024-11-17 17:07
updated: 2025-02-14 22:04
author:
images:
order:
enableToc:
permalink:
aliases:
draft:
publish:
tags: art, culture, politics
---

\[I don’t remember where this essay appeared 😹]
***

Like most mentions of [[blg/old/nettime/nettime]], its Wikipedia entry duly records that the “internet mailing list” was founded by Geert Lovink and Pit Schultz in 1995. The entry goes on to list “notable” subscribers, significant events, and print publications. Unlike the prosaic description offered by Felix Stalder and Jesse Hirsh [in a 2002 article for *First Monday*](http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/961/882) (which would form the basis of a much better Wikipedia entry), the official entry is, in literary terms, closer to hagiography than an encyclopedia entry: a recitation of heroic deeds obscured by the mists of time. The last two events the entry mentions are the publication of the 550-page compilation *README!* in 1999, and the more modest 2001 publication *NKPVI*. It seems a bit odd that anyone would bother to consistently take (or consistently ‘accept’) credit for _founding_ something that would seem to have been moribund for nearly a decade and a half. And yet they do. Why?

The answer lies partly in the tortured subjective-subjunctive formulation “would seem to have been,” which of course is completely different from what it was at the time. The early nettime was a monument (or what passes for it in a networked world) to Lovink’s brilliant and fanatical project of finding promising weirdos around the world and connecting them. For that — and his project encompassed much more than nettime — he deserves lasting credit. But a communicative environment like a mailing list is anything but anything silently monumental; if credit is due to anyone at all, it’s due first and foremost to the list’s thousands of contributors and readers over many years. That ‘heroic’ histories of nettime rarely if ever acknowledge this presents them in a very different aspect: they’re deeply polemical.

Even in its earliest days, Nettime’s traffic was anything but heroic. Instead, it was sparse (20 messages in December 1995, 53 in January 1996, 32 in February, and so on), random, and in retrospect seems surprisingly meek. Much of it was cut-and-pasted stuff from around the net — which, prior to the rise of web-oriented search engines (Altavista launched on 15 Dec 1995), often took investigative effort to discover. In this sense, then, the earliest nettime project centered less on the production of original writings than on — as the list’s [.sig](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Signature_block) announced from the first message of February 1996 — “collaborative text filtering” as a technique for defining a “cultural politics of the nets.” As Schultz and Lovink declared in their introduction to [“the print-out of nettime,”](http://www.nettime.org/Lists-Archives/nettime-l-9601/msg00033.html) prepared for the Next Five minutes 2 in Amsterdam (18–21 Jan 1996), “The quality of the texts is a product of social filtering of external material and it is editing.” The result was a “mixed bag of micro pamphlets, action protocols, almost-manifestoes, dirty excerpts, quick transcriptions, pirated interviews, scanned philosophies, and last but not least ‘pure criticism’” — an eclectic bricolage assembled by a kind of collective subject connected through an invitation-only “semi-closed mailing-list.”

Nettime’s contributors were a fairly autonomous (or even autonomist) bunch; so, if the list succeeded, it was inevitable that it would take on an unruly life of its own. It did, and in doing so it followed a typical trajectory — concerns about the volume of traffic, distortions brought about by contributors who seemed too dominant or programmatic, the drive to formalize and institutionalize the project, and the like. These tensions eventually (and predictably) became a central feature of the list’s traffic — in increasingly reflexive debates that marked the list’s mutation from an instrument to something more like an organization.

Prior to those debates, though, discussions about these issues were conducted ‘offline’ at various meetings attached “parasitically” to conferences and art festivals. A prominent subject at these meetings was the belief that a mailing list was a flawed vehicle, riven by perverse and arbitrary dynamics — especially  early on because, for many, these dynamics were new and unfamiliar. Thus, for example, Lovink and Schultz [wrote of the Hybrid Workspace event/environment at Documenta X in the late summer of 1997](http://www.nettime.org/Lists-Archives/nettime-l-9706/msg00210.html) that

>in the near future many of the nettime threads will paralellize we hope. it is also about testing new info-architextures which diversify the enforced unity and silence of the mailinglist. it is an experiment is meant for all you who felt both overwhelmend by traffic and surpressed to chut up and listen while you actually wanted to add something. \[*sic*]

If success is defined, for example, by the number of adopters or the amount of traffic, then none of these projects was successful. While quantitative measures have since become the norm in evaluations like this, the nettime project was at its core _qualitative_. Thus, while these explorations may not have gone anywhere, the experimentation itself offered a way to translate reflexive critiques of mailing-list culture into practices beyond theoretical criticism — and in that sense were important. (However, the fact that list continued to grow and change even as successive experiments failed is, likewise, an implicit critique of these efforts to expand.)

At the other extreme, from the very beginning nettime’s face-to-face meetings had led to a series of print publications, the ironically named _Zentral Kommittee Proceedings_: ZKP1 (for the Next 5 Minutes 2, held in Jan 1996 in Amsterdam); ZKP2 (Cyberconf 5, June 1996 in Madrid); ZKP3 (Metaforum 3, Oct 1996, in Budapest); and — fueled by art-versus-theory conflict that had quickly emerged in this milieu — ZKP 3.2.1 (Nov 1996 in Ljubljana), dedicated to net.art and edited by [Vuk Ćosić](https://monoskop.org/Vuk_%C4%86osi%C4%87) and [Heath Bunting](https://www.irational.org/heath/); and [ZKP4](http://www.ljudmila.org/nettime/zkp4/toc.htm), printed for nettime’s only dedicated meeting, [“Beauty and the East,”](http://www.ljudmila.org/nettime/announce.htm) held at Ljudmila, the [Ljubljana Digital Media Lab](https://www.culture.si/en/Depot:Ljudmila_-_Ljubljana_Digital_Media_Lab), in May 1997.\[**Note:** This account omits the German-language book *[Netzkritik, Materialien zur Internet-Debatte](https://monoskop.org/images/e/e5/Lovink_Geert_Schultz_Pit_Netzkritik_Materialien_zur_Internet-Debatte_1997.pdf)*, variously attributed to “Geert Lovink,” “nettime”, and “Geert Lovink, Nettime.”]

The manifest existence of these publications was itself widely accepted by several members of the ZK’s loose membership as proof that the list could accomplish more than ‘merely’ propagate open-ended discussion. And, conversely, in later discussions about possible directions that nettime might take, the failure to produce later print publications was often cited as proof that the list had lost its vitality and direction. Yet the publications’ very limited editions (typically 150–200 copies), quick-and-dirty (and therefore fragile) production values, and distribution at events that, however seminal, nevertheless attracted a very in-crowd, ensured that rather than circulating widely as “tactical media” outreach they would instead serve mainly to swell personal archives as fetish objects from the exclusive ur-period.

Early on, these publications and meetings formed a virtuous circle; however, as the list grew in size and stature, this circle began to turn in reverse, with increasingly vicious consequences. The last page of ZKP4, distributed at Beauty and the East, featured on its last page a cartoonishly bitmapped icon of the “Holy Bible” with the caption “coming soon” set in the typographic equivalent of a stage whisper. (If ever there were a project utterly alien to the fractious non-group of nettime subscribers, list, compiling a _Bible_ was surely it.) As planning for ZKP5 progressed, more and more well-intended messages ‘from’ nettime began to appear on the list, leaving many subscribers scratching their heads about just who was doing what it their name.

As plans for ZKP5 progressed, the contradiction at the heart of nettime — between Lovink’s and Schultz’s initial vanguardist vision of an expansive alternative-media project, on the one hand, and a more modest, adaptive, and communitarian view centered on the actually existing list, on the other — became increasingly evident. For example, a September 1997 announcement from the “Ad Hoc Kassel Committee” — which included Lovink and Schultz, billed as “the Nettime Brothers” — neatly if ‘ironically’ (in tone but not in operational logic) [touched on several of the key emerging fault lines](http://www.nettime.org/Lists-Archives/nettime-l-9709/msg00027.html):

>\[W]e decided it would also be nice to have a lexicon of Nettime terms (such as ‘gift economy,’ names and abbreviations like ‘V2’, ‘Next 5 Minutes,’ and so forth). The glossary should be collectively produced by the Nettime community. The committee believes that a glossary would be very helpful to newcomers, and aid people in preparing publications, like the upcoming ZKP (yes, ‘ZKP’ should also be in the lexicon).

Messages like this, which became more frequent as ZKP5 morphed into _README!_, fueled increasingly vocal concerns about the nettime project as such: that the “ZK” had become too opaque, that its use of “we” was presumptuous, that net.artists’ formidable contributions had been aggressively marginalized, that in pursuing print it had lost sight of its project of an immanent critique of and on the net, and so on. In a few cases, the flames were further fanned by contributors (e.g., [Paul Garrin](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paul_Garrin) and [antiorp](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Netochka_Nezvanova_(author))) whose agendas included their commercial interests. And the resulting “moderation wars,” which Lovink has documented with obvious erudition and a less obvious ‘perspective,’ were in turn cited by Lovink, Schultz, and their sympathizers — in a few cases, on the list itself — as evidence that alternatives to the expansionist vision of nettime were the cause of dissension both on the list and in “ZK” back-channels. They were certainly a contributing factor, but only in relation to the tragic vision of a mailing list as a hopelessly flawed medium for disseminating ideas and maybe thereby effecting change.

If the lack of subsequent nettime print publications is indeed a failure, then the eventual result of the ZKP5/”Bible” project, _README!_, is the last will and testament of the tragic, rupture-driven vision of nettime as an interstitial ‘platform’ dedicated to remediating the division between the net and print — and all that ‘print’ was seen by some to stand for. Nettime’s Wikipedia entry places great emphasis on the claim that “nettime was initially a pre-publishing platform for international critical thinkers,” which is — brilliantly — both true and false. However, the fact that the entry omits alternative views of what nettime could and should be is no accident; instead, it stems from the fact that the alternative sees the list itself, and the resulting archive, as a manifest, open, and expansive testament to the contributions by thousands of people over the last decade and a half. And the fact that the people who have maintained the list for the last (as of this writing) thirteen years without ostentatiously taking credit for doing so isn’t an omission. Rather, it’s a deliberate choice to step away from metacredit and, instead, to contribute in an incremental, quotidian way to a decisively different vision of nettime as an ongoing resource that connects the ‘heroic’ constellations of early immanent net-critique — not with fetishized print but with the actually existing net.