---
title: 2027(?) > “The List as Open Collectivity — nettime at 25 Years and Counting”
description:
extract:
created: 2024-11-17 17:07
updated: 2025-02-14 22:04
author:
images:
order:
enableToc:
permalink:
aliases:
draft:
publish:
tags: art
---

*by Ted Byfield, Felix Stalder, and nettime*[^1]

This is an insider account. Both of us have been deeply involved in the \<nettime> project from very early on, and most of that time on a daily basis as the list’s moderators. As a brief self-description the footer appended to every message states, 

> \#\<nettime> is a moderated mailing list for net criticism, collaborative text filtering and cultural politics of the nets

So our story is inevitably biased in ways that we are probably not even aware of; but we hope to make up for this with a nuanced account of the transformations of the project which have kept it, for more than 20 years, an important node in the free-ranging, oppositional examination of the cultural and technopolitical transformations of the present. Indeed, the peculiar relationship between transformation and continuity is probably the key to understanding \<nettime> and why it has remained relevant for so long and why we call it an “open collectivity.” By this, we mean a group of people held together by a shared horizon grounded in common experiences, vectors of interests, and modes of agency; but rather than relying on a fixed internal structure or charismatic personalities, its internal composition remains fluid, evolving in response to shifting desires, pressures, and opportunities.

However, “technological” terms, \<nettime> has barely changed at all. Since its founding in late October of 1995, its material basis has been a mailing list — a simple piece of software, running on a server, which manages a subscriber list and distributes email to them. Moreover, \<nettime> has always restricted messages to the text-only format. Initially, this convention was driven by communitarian aims of maximizing access (for users who connected over a low-bandwidth modem) and minimizing software conflicts. Over time, though, this became central to the list’s culture and, as more communication turned image-heavy, one of its distinguishing features. So there are no “styled” formats, no attachments, and no images, sound, or video. At first, \<nettime> used the majordomo software package, then later Mailman; both are standard (mostly) free software programs. There are some minor tweaks to mailman so the list can still be moderated using a command-line interface — arcane but efficient — but that’s it. Nothing special.

Running a mailing list also involves technical decisions and social approaches that shape not just the daily ebb and flow of traffic but also the cumulative archive. We recognized this early on, and formulated a few minimal “policies” — for example, discouraging “bare” URLs and encouraging people to send complete texts, which over time ensured that, unlike most mailing-list archives, \<nettime>’s would become an open library of substantial ideas rather than a chatty jumble of links to bitrot, parked domains, and malware traps. Other choices have contributed to this unusual resource — notably, the use of a pseudonymous “digestive system” collate multiple smaller contributions into one message to alter the dynamics of exchanges away from the quick and off-hand, or anonymizing of many contributions, or incorporating interesting texts external on current (and sometimes past) events and phenomena to refocus the attention of the list.

The list has always been hosted on noncommercial servers run by people within the open collectivity that formed the list. First, at the International City Berlin, then from February 1996 to July 1999 at desk.nl, then after a brief temporary asylum on material.net (NYC), the list moved to bbs.thing.net (NYC), and since July, 2007 it has been hosted on kein.org (Munich). Its archive, which as of late 2015 contains more than 22,000 messages, the full traffic since the list’s inception, was hosted first by the Society for Old and New Media (waag.org [Amsterdam]); since 2014 on servers run by the media arts collective [!Mediengruppe Bitnik](https://wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww.bitnik.org) (Zürich). For most users, whose numbers rose slowly but continuously to about 4500 in late 2015, these changes in the technical infrastructure were barely perceptible.

Relying on fluid relations of friendship made it possible to run the project without involving any financial exchanges, not even donations or grants. Someone pays for the domain name, but that’s it. Everything is donated in kind, according to ability and according to need. There was never a compelling reason to develop any formal organizational structure, and — in light of periodic ruptures in funding patterns that led to so many failed cultural organizations — many compelling reasons not to. As an organization, then, \<nettime> is made up of deep, overlapping ties of mutual interest, friendship, respect, and commitment. For those without such ties \<nettime> might sometimes seem alienating, exclusive or even “closed,” culturally speaking.

This approach is not without its peculiar twists, to which we will return, but extreme informality enabled the open collectivity to morph into numerous shapes, to adapt to the changing needs and interests of this constituency, and to keep everything on a voluntary, self-motivated basis. Moreover, rather than focus on specific issues or projects, \<nettime> provided a deliberately open context for disseminating, debating, and documenting the wider range of ideas — technopolitics, media activism, aesthetics and art practice, media law and policy, intellectual property, economics, security and cryptography, digital human rights, and the changing construction of “the artist,” to name just a few — from which local activist practices sprang. As such, for at least some first-generation subscribers it became a "university of the nets," a high-signal, low-noise internationalist source for radical theories and practices.

Thus, while the list’s technology has remained simple and stable, the collectivity and the value it provides to its members, has undergone subtle but deep changes. This can be summarized by dividing the last 20 years of history into four phases. This periodization is admittedly somewhat arbitrary, but for present purposes it should serve to highlight the intertwingled threads of continuity and change.

### The Delirium of Networking: the “heroic period,” 1995–1998

\<nettime> was initiated by group of artists, writers and activists around Geert Lovink and Pit Schulz at a time when the Internet was far from “ubiquitous.”[^2] Even where the net was available it could often be hard to reach, through cranky modems and creaky connections. Once connected, it didn’t take much effort to stumble into raging debates about what this “Internet,” which appeared to many as a tremendous but vague promise, was supposed to be. The loudest chorus was American, many of whom advanced the notion of cyberspace as yet another new frontier and new territory for cowboy romance. \<nettime> immediately positioned itself against such spatial metaphors.

 > The time of nettime is a social time, it is subjective and intensive, with condensation and extractions, segmented by social events like conferences and little meetings, and text gatherings for export into the paper world. Most people still like to read a text printed on wooden paper, more than transmitted via waves of light. Nettime is not the same time like geotime, or the time clocks go. Everyone who programs or often sits in front of a screen knows about the phenomena of being out of time, time on the net consists of different speeds, computers, humans, software, bandwidth, the only way to see a continuity of time on the net is to see it as a asynchronous network of synchronized time zones.[^3]

\<nettime> emerged from meetings of European artists and activists interested in exploring the new possibilities of the net for artistic and political experimentation with a maximum of independence from established institutions. Initially the list served as a way to keep these discussions going between meetings and to include people unable to travel at the frantic pace of events. The first years were delirious as international communication as a daily activity was new to almost everyone. The self-styled task of creating a new “European” net.culture was never about geography — it was about affinities. Those involved included deep connections into the former East Bloc, which had opened up only a few years earlier, as well as important contingents from North America and Australia — all within a medium with no fixed rules or expectations, which contributed to what Geert Lovink once called “the short summer of the Internet.” But not everyone felt content with the new lingua franca, English, and the vague borderlessness of the Net. Soon, additional \<nettime> lists appeared, as fora for discussions in Dutch, Romanian, French, Serbo-Croatian, Spanish/Portuguese and other languages. Not all of them thrived, but some did, for almost as long as the English language list.

The iconic statement from this early period is still Richard Barbrook and Andy Cameron’s “Californian Ideology,” published in Mute magazine. This essay provided a powerful critique of the “bizarre fusion” of seemingly contradictory elements: neoliberal worship of the entrepreneur and the market, irreverence of anti-authoritarian counterculture, and McLuhanite technological determinism. This “heterodox ideology,” they argued, systematically omitted the crucial roles of public funding and of grassroots activists in the history of the Internet, erasing non-market histories and futures.

Given how dominant the internet has become in such a short time, it would be easy to overlook how the adoption of a mailing list to connect these diverse people and contexts was itself a form of media activism. There is an open question whether, over time, the mailing list has become so normalized as to lose that potential, something that happened arguably to other “tactical media”— for example, guerrilla video. We think not — and that it’s worth reflecting on what unexamined potentials mailing lists may have (say, compared to commercial and image-driven “social media”).

From the beginning, \<nettime> served as an environment for experimentation with the new medium and, beyond that, as a collaborative platform to prepare publications outside of it. The physical fact of these publications later was seen by some as prima facie evidence that an effort remained “real” — and its absence evidence that an effort had somehow lost its way. However that may be, the combination of continuous exchanges and sporadic meetings (often “parasitically” attached to larger cultural events) and publication proved to be productive, flexible, and durable.

This mode of operation enabled a wide variety of people to forge a core of shared experiences, both personal and collective. As a result, the list’s subscriber base quickly approached 1,000, many of them significant artists and thinkers in the early net.cultures. The preferred offline publication format was that of a newspaper: quick, dirty, and easy to distribute while travelling. Between January and November 1996 five newspapers were published in connection with festivals across Europe, and in 1997 another one. In the same year, the collectivity provided the backbone of the “hybrid workspace” at the Documenta X exhibition. By 1999 \<nettime> was already publishing its own anthology *ReadMe! ASCII Culture and the Revenge of Knowledge*; and in 2001, an edited version of nettime was part of the catalogue of the Slovenian pavilion at the Venice Biennale.[^4]

But summers don’t last long, particularly short ones. Two main fault lines quickly opened up within the collectivity. First, some sought to use the list to advance narrow personal/political agendas. Second, open conflict between “net.artists” who sought to explore the boundaries of the list-format (for example, by doing what would later came to be known as “trolling” as an art practice) and “net.theorists” who insisted the list should be a channel for ambitious net.criticism. In 1997 a number of net.artists left the list in protest and founded another, called 7-11. Paul Garrin, a New York–based video artist-activist known for his confrontational style, promoted a series of projects, including an alternative DNS authority, and hijacked \<nettime>’s subscriber base for his own short-lived “<nettime.free>” list. And, throughout these years, a shadowy procession of seemingly 24/7 always-on entities variously known as antiorp, =cw4t7abs, integer, and netochka nezvanova (or “nn”) assailed \<nettime> and other forums with astonishing messages that combined furious bile, ASCII art-inspired deconstructions, and scathing and often-brilliant critiques of authoritarianism — as well as promotions of his/her/their software.

These tensions were addressed by switching to moderation mode, a function that has always been baked into the mailing-list software. But since there were no clear rules for how to moderate, and rejected messages remained invisible, this led to acrimonious debates about “censorship” and a brief experiment with an “unfiltered” version of the list, <nettime-bold>. Varied proposals for how the selection process (and of course who is doing the selecting) could be made more flexible and spontaneous were advanced — for example, by changing platforms from a mailing list to something else in order to allow subscribers to do their own idiosyncratic “text filtering” — but nothing ever came of them.

A third tension arose early on, which the \<nettime> collectivity has never found adequate ways to overcome: gender bias. Nettime has always been very male — not necessarily in terms of its subscriber base but certainly in terms of its communication culture. There was quite a bit of overlap between \<nettime> and early cyberfeminism (including the “faces” email list), but the collectivity never found adequate ways to provide an environment for explicit, sustained feminist discourses. And, to the extent that feminist and gender-oriented ideas have played a pivotal role in broader liberationist movements around the world, this tacit weakness has marginalized \<nettime> as a resource for younger activists. \<nettime> is far from unique in this regard: the difficulty of addressing often implicit and unacknowledged biases is a key weakness of the informal mode of voluntary organisation, offline and online (from free software communities to Wikipedia). Within \<nettime> this problem has been widely recognized and periodically acknowledged (for example, with citations of Jo Freedman’s classic 1971 text “The Tyranny of Structurelessness”), but this has never translated into substantial practical change.

In retrospect, it’s not surprising that debates in \<nettime>’s milieu would anticipate many of the basic operations that underpin the follow/like economies of social media. However, and particularly in the context of narcissistic hyperdifferentiation that defines “social media,” it was fortunate that \<nettime>’s flows of messages wasn’t splintered by competing moderations. Rather than relying on a system of technically implemented (and therefore enforced) differentiation, an open collectivity communicates in a unified environment where everyone is equidistant. In \<nettime>’s case, it proved to be much more fluid and able to negotiate imprecise shifts in taste and attention. It was this implicit vagueness that gave \<nettime> a supple adaptability that many other collective ventures lost in the ensuing strife.

### Crisis Intervention: the bombing of Serbia (1999)

All of these debates faded quickly into the background once NATO started to bomb Serbia on March 24, 1999. As is often the case, mass media on all sides shifted into propaganda mode. (See also Veran Matic’s text in this volume.) \<nettime> suddenly turned into a channel in which people on the receiving end of the bombing campaign, the members of the collectivity who lived in Belgrade, reported the terrifying facts in near-real time. This provided an important counterbalance to the media narratives, which were dominated by the video-feeds from “smart” bombs and their implied ideology of a “clean” war. The reach of these dispatches from the ground was considerably farther than just the list itself, since several members of the collectivity in the West worked in the media and used this material in their stories. At certain critical times, the feedback loops established through \<nettime> were much quicker and more accurate than those provided by major news providers such as CNN. Retrospectively, we can see that this was a pioneering moment for both “citizen journalism” and “real-time crisis monitoring,” two functions that are now separated into blogging and derivative “micro” platforms such as Twitter. At the time, though, they hadn’t yet been articulated as such and were still unified within email.

At the end of an extremely intensive period, in which the collectivity had to learn to cope with the relentless and intimate reporting of the dirty realities of war among friends who suddenly found themselves on different sides, the collectivity was exhausted.[^5] Though shortly after, energizing events took place in the streets of Seattle and set off another short summer, that of the anti-globalisation movement which had forced its way onto the global stage, drawing heavily on the new modes of horizontal communication provided by the Internet.

### The Long Bust: the dotcom crash, 9/11, and the lure of social media (2000–2008)

The bursting of the bubble of Internet stocks in March 2000, signaled the end of the first irrational exuberance of the Internet. Things got considerably worse in the following year. The brutal police crackdown on the massive protests against the G8-Meeting in Genoa Italy in July 2001 was a turning point in the state’s response to the antiglobalization movement in which many in the open collectivity where deeply involved. A few months later, the events of 9/11 not only caught the New York-based contingent of the collectivity up close, but it soon became apparent that this would not only lead to new wars abroad, but also to new repression at home and surveillance of online communication.

While the champions of the Californian ideology rebounded from the shock of the stock market with a new label, Web 2.0 and, soon afterward “social media,” the mood within the collectivity remained dark. The new developments were quickly analyzed as a profound reengineering of the Internet infrastructure away from the early decentralized designs towards new centralized platforms firmly in the hand of (venture) capital. The fact that in the early days of social-media investors were happy to sustain losses in exchange for market share, barely obscured the new power-relations that were being implemented.

The arrest of Critical Art Ensemble’s Steve Kurtz, an important voice in technoculture in the US and Europe, in May of 2004 was significant in its own right and also symptomatic of the increasingly humorless and violent view the state and corporations were taking to the domain of media activism, another core concern of many people within the collectivity. After Kurtz’s wife died unexpectedly of a heart attack, emergency workers interpreted the scientific materials in Kurtz’s home in the worst possible light and called in federal law enforcement agencies. He was subjected to a years-long prosecution for criminal mail and wire fraud under the USA PATRIOT Act. It showed to many that criticial cultural practice, as Konrad Becker put it at the time, “does in fact touch the nerve of occult power in the techno state”[^6] — even (maybe especially) when it operates on a purely semiotic level. The overblown repression of a critic of the techno-political power system now appears as a precursor of the stepped-up repression of hackers and journalists surrounding WikiLeaks, Anonymous, and other renegades.

During those years, \<nettime> was declared dead several times. In some ways, then, it’s surprising that the list, rather than fading away, shifted gears toward deeper historical analyses of the networked condition — for example, in the debates triggered by Brian Holmes’s essays on history and transformations of cybernetics.

By now, one consequence of moderation and its strictly voluntary mode was becoming clearer. The new social media intensified the speed and sheer volume of communication, making message lengths shorter and visual content ever more pivotal; above all, reaction became the dominant currency. \<nettime> by contrast, moved in the opposite direction — mainly by not changing at all. Moderation necessarily involves a delay, which, given the contingent nature of collective efforts, could be as little as a few minutes or as much as a few days, depending on circumstances. Far from being an obstacle, though, this often introduced a slight (and manipulable) lag to exchanges on the list, which allowed time for reflection in reading and writing rather than reaction. Discussion threads extended over days, sometimes weeks, and often would be taken up again at a later point. The fact that each member had a local copy of the list’s conversation in his or her email folder (in addition to the online archive) provided the collectivity with a sense of its own history and allowed for an uneven accumulation of collective references and knowledge.

An important part of nettime’s legacy from this period is the large number of projects it has helped to spawn over the years. As nettime itself ceased to “do” physical events and became more “global,” independent projects and contexts developed around specific areas of interest. Some centered on discussion — mailing lists like syndicate, which focused on central and eastern Europe, [rohrpost] in Germany, and fibre-culture in Australia. Others developed into fields of thought, like digital labor. Still others developed into hybrid online/offline formats — notably the no-border camps and the edu-factory collective. Obviously, these initiatives have produced their own histories; but there have been moments — for example, cultural events like Berlin’s transmediale festival — that could feel very much like nettime meetings in everything but name.

### Living the Crisis: the return of the (un)real (2008–)

Two events cast into sharp relief some of the basic concerns that have been important to \<nettime>’s collectivity from the beginning — and showed the brutally bare extremes that power structures would impose in order to preserve their privilege, even at the cost of never-ending and expanding crises. First, the catastrophic effects of financialization as a core element of neoliberalism and the willingness of the state to intervene on behalf of “too-big-to-fail” banks became shockingly apparent in the wake of the 2008 economic meltdown. And second, the blanket surveillance that the military-communication complex relies on to detect and contain social unrest which was made public by the leaks of Edward Snowden starting in 2013. Such issues that had been staples of \<nettime>’s discussions — the role and shape of infrastructures, the materiality of politics, the continuities and transformations of capitalism, the possibilities of resistance and imagination of radical alternatives — suddenly found mainstream resonance.

Particularly in the wake of 2008, as cultural funding dried up in many countries, \<nettime>’s no-money collectivity model has proven to be resilient and sustainable. In some ways, the double crisis that marks the second decade of our century, is bringing \<nettime> back to its roots. An intense interest in socio-technical infrastructures and understanding social critique that fits the current social transformation needs not only theoretical tools, but also new forms of organisation. It is, perhaps, this twin concern, more than anything else, that has motivated the collectivity for such a long time.

Whether it remains capable of generating substantive contributions to this distributed effort that takes place in many contexts and modes around the world remains an open question. Some serious and absolutely legitimate criticisms — many of which hadn’t been voiced on the list in years, in some cases because their advocates had long ago given up — were summarized in an April Fool’s prank in 2015, in which we announced that we were closing the list:

> \<nettime> has been ‘graying.’ It’s wedded to a particular Euro-American moment, the so-called summer of the Internet, which has since turned to winter. Nettime’s once-radical embrace of the ex-East — or, if you like, of the ex-West — barely extends to Hungary now, and has nothing to say to the decisive conflicts around Russia’s borders…. Its early tacit prohibition on ritualized debates about Israel and Palestine has grown into a complete failure to address the profoundly important dynamics across parts of the world conventionally — and reductively — called ‘Muslim’ or ‘Arab.’ These areas are too often consigned to the ‘timelessness’ of conflict, but there’s every reason to believe that their liberatory struggles could ultimately define the future of the “WEIRD” nations [that is, Western, educated, industrialized, rich, and developed]. China? Barely a peep about it. Africa? Nettime is nowheresville. The seas, the skies, the circulatory flows? Nada. And how about nongeographical ‘areas’ where the most moving cultural changes are happening — in the flowerings of new forms of subjectivity around the world and the new forms of sovereignty they’re giving rise to. Silence. But, really, who cares what a bunch of straight white cis guys — which is 95% of the list’s traffic — think about those things?

We formulated these criticisms in the context of a failed effort to stage a new and different \<nettime> meeting: farther east than before, and with a renewed emphasis on learning about where and how (and maybe when) activist efforts had migrated — efforts that were media-savvy yet ignored in mainstream media. The list’s flexibility, and the ‘equidistance’ we noted earlier, limit participants’ ability (and probably their motivation) to act collectively.

And, of course, \<nettime> also shares other serious weaknesses with media-activist efforts, sometimes very literally. The list’s reliance on noncommercial and volunteer resources have also made it vulnerable in basic respects. At times, its minimal infrastructure depended on servers shared with more radical members — for example, eToy, the Yes Men, and Ricardo Dominguez’s “Floodnet.”[^7] When their more radical activities led upstream ISPs to shut these servers down, \<nettime> (along with many other projects and people) came under direct threat. More recently, it has become clear that the commitment to a relatively old media infrastructure, the mailing list, makes \<nettime> unappealing for many who might share its sensitivies but grew up with email as the tool of choice for administrators in schools and universities. In late 2015, nettime finally developed brigde to more contemporary forms of communication, by creating the @nettime_bot, which automatically forwards nettime messages to Twitter. In some ways, this is barely more than an in-joke in which “long form” writing is translated into an absurdly short form; but it’s also more than that. It allows \<nettime>, or at least, links to the archive, to circulate through different channels. Whether that proves to be too little too late remains to be seen.

These weaknesses run the risk of letting \<nettime> drift even deeper into its own peculiarity — as Morlock Elloi, a staunch pseudonym in the collectivity, put it in late 2015 — to become just another group of “self-similar[s] in faraway land,” where like-minded people substitute their irrelevance for the joy of being together. The list’s waning emphasis on face-to-face meetings and media-activist actions might be a symptom that the list was becoming increasingly “bourgie” — which it no doubt has, to a certain extent. It also reflected the aging demographic of \<nettime>’s core members — for example, their growing concern with stable professional jobs (particularly in arts-oriented segments of academia), raising children, and so on. Whatever the cause, there’s no doubt that less emphasis on face-to-face meetings has also diminished the spontaneity and force the collectivity would be capable of.

### Transformation (2022–)

In late 2022, the nettime project underwent significant change, with two major aspects. We, the long-standing moderators, invited proposals for a new team to assume responsibility for maintaining and guiding the list. The new crew took over in August, 2023 and the hosting was moved to servus.at, a non-profit net culture initiative based in Linz, Austria.[^9] And roughly in parallel, we formed a new group to launch a nettime Mastodon “instance” or server in the distributed social media network often referred to as the Fediverse.[^8] To highlight  the shift from the long from of email to the short form of social media, the instance is called “tldr”, the old net-culture acronym for “too long; didn’t read!”. The two versions of nettime run largely independent of one another, except for a bot that reposts all messages from the mailing list to the mastodon instance.

Whether the new moderation crew and the Fediverse instance is another moment in the shifting, contingent relationships between continuity and transformation, which has always been central to \<nettime>’s success, is an open question. So far at least, the collectivity has managed to re-attune itself to changing circumstances, for more than 25 years, and counting.

# Notes

[^1]: In keeping with Felix and my own longstanding agreement that, as moderators, *we do not speak for the collective*, the essay’s authorial credit included the list itself. See the discussion of a draft of this article on the list: [“choose-your-own adventure: a brief history of nettime” (Sun, 1 Nov 2015 16:24:30 +0100)](http://nettime.org/Lists-Archives/nettime-l-1511/msg00001.html).

[^2]: See Geert Lovink, *[My First Recession: Critical Internet Culture in Transition](https://networkcultures.org/_uploads/tod/TOD9_MyFirstRecession_LQ.pdf)* (Rotterdam: V2_/NAi Publishers, 2003).

[^3]: [“Panic Content — The ZKP 3 Introduction Draft” (October 1996), re-sent over the list on Wed, 8 Apr 1998 17:31:55 +0100](http://nettime.org/Lists-Archives/nettime-l-9804/msg00025.html).

[^4]: All publications are archived at [www.nettime.org/pub.html](https://www.nettime.org/pub.html).

[^5]: At the height of the campaign, in April 1999, \<nettime> carried some 500 messages. This may seem like a trivial number by today’s standards of social media feeds, but the format, density, intimacy, and urgency of the reports made it nearly overwhelming for many.

[^6]: [”FREEDOM, TERROR & SEMIOTIC DEMOCRACY”](http://www.nettime.org/Lists-Archives/nettime-l-0406/msg00047.html).

[^7]: See, for example, “[Electronic Disturbance: Ricardo Dominguez interviewed by Coco Fusco](http://subsol.c3.hu/subsol_2/contributors2/domingueztext2.html),” (n.d. \[ca. Nov. 1999])].

[^8]: See the official announcement by Paul van der Walt, [“new mods, new nettime-l” on the list (07 Aug 2023 21:02:38 +1000)](https://nettime.org/Lists-Archives/nettime-l-2308/msg00012.html).

[^9]: See [https://tldr.nettime.org/about](https://tldr.nettime.org/about).