---
title: 1999-04-17 some thoughts on war and language
description: 
extract: 
created: 2024-11-17 17:08
updated: 2025-02-14 22:04
author: 
images: 
order: 
enableToc: 
permalink: 
aliases: 
draft: 
publish: 
date: 1999-04-17
tags:
  - africa
  - asia
  - history
  - language
  - right
  - "#war"
  - "#politics"
  - publishing
  - violence
---

To: nettime-l
Subject: <nettime> some thoughts
From: t byfield
Date: [Sat, 17 Apr 1999](https://nettime.org/Lists-Archives/nettime-l-9904/msg00296.html)

i just spent the weekend making boring technical translation changes to the english version of a ‘catalog’ for an exhibition organized by the Hamburger Insitut fuer Sozialforschung, *Vernichtungskrieg: Verbrechen der Wehrmacht, 1941 bis 1944* (trans. *The German Army and Genocide: Crimes Against War Prisoners, Jews, and Other Civilians 1941–1944*). for the most part, this book consists of hundreds of minimally and meticulously annotated pictures of, basically, corpses — actual corpses or soon-to-be corpses. the corpses are doing what corpses do: hang, sometimes alone, sometimes in lines of a dozen or more, often with nice signs explaining who they are and what they did; if the photographer was quick enough, they’re swinging — their legs splay apart, since tying them together made it too awkward to maneuver them onto a truck or bench to be hanged; they sprawl in heaps that are impossible to visually untangle — sometimes there are a few, sometimes a hundred; they lie, often in a strangely confined rigidity, in rows, sometimes a dozen, sometimes a hundred; they’re piled up, in wagons, in trucks, in freight cars, in yards, in field, in forests, in trenches, in sandpits. and the soon-to-be corpses are doing what soon-to-be corpses do under the circumstances: waiting alone, waiting in line, waiting in masses, kneeling, sitting, walking, standing in dozens or hundreds by fences, patiently waiting to be shot or waiting while soldiers loop a noose around their neck. of course, throughout these pictures there are huge numbers of soldiers, as well, doing what they did: guarding, counting, organizing, pushing, prodding, looting, talking, looking, aiming, shooting, hanging. what comes through very clearly in these pictures is how much of this particular war was curiously boring for everyone involved. in between the no doubt exciting battles, most of this was a very procedural affair; even the people who are about to die look somehow bored, as though they have no way to make sense of what is happening. how could they? how exactly do you make sense of the fact that you’re not exactly waiting, really, but lining up to die?

i’ve worked on a lot of books about this kind of warfare — the histories, the theory, the practice. most of them have involved the US military, which of course made very detailed studies of the ‘antipartisan’ warfare that erupted during world war two in the ‘east’ — and went on to refine and propagate it to other regimes under various new names (‘antiguerrilla,’ ‘unconventional,’ ‘counterinsurgency,’ ‘low-intensity conflict,’ etc.) throughout southeas asia, latin america, the middle east, vast swaths of africa, oceania. there’s an art to exterminating a village, it’s a very technical thing, you have to be really organized: there’s a body of knowledge involved in doing so, and over the past decades growing numbers of people have mastered it. there are colleges and camps where it’s taught; there are curricula — manuals, textbooks, films, and, now, i assume, multimedia materials that show what to do and what not to do if one’s goal is to exterminate people actively and passively involved in and and around an armed resistance movement. in the course of working on books about this business, i ended up doing a fair amount of research, which was always a very strange contrast: doing what one does in the dusty neatness of archives and libraries, but reading about these techniques, good and bad examples, and so on. at a certain point, it got to be too much to deal with, though, and i decided i needed a change. i came quite close to doing graduate work in forensic anthropology, specifically, the meticulously boring job of exhuming mass graves; it seemed like it’d be a pretty decent line of work, as they go — not the happiest, certainly, but a constructive thing, ‘undisappearing’ or ‘reappearing’ people, figuring out who had killed them, returning their remains to their families, laying the technical basis for trials or, more often, better-informed amnesties. but for various reasons — the most trivial among them that i have a weak stomach — i decided against it. the prospect of, for example, figuring out that a mass of skeletons were missing their legs because soldiers had herded people into a building and grenaded or shot or burned them, then returned later to cover it up only to find that the bodies were so decomposed that the legs came right off — this isn’t a happy business. and that’s just one kind of the amazing universe of brutality that takes place in these situations; to do that kind of work, one has to be aware of many, many more possibilities. it was a good decision not to go into that racket, i think. and it’s good that other people are willing to do it.

it’s been a while since i’ve dealt with the kind of material in this catalog, and it’ll be a while before i work on it again — maybe never again. it’s really horrible stuff, just numbing; and that much more so to be sharpening red pencils and checking the translated captions for hundreds and hundreds of these pictures. normally, editing is an interesting business with a dreary side; but it’s not so often that i find myself stopping and crying over what i’m reading. but how else can one make sense of these pictures? sure, there are the historiographical issues, the wways in which theories emanating from the highest levels of the german government were predicated on logistical assumptions that fell apart on the eastern front, and how the exigencies of supporting these armies radicalized the situation and turned these speeches and documents into the daily techniques of thinning out the number of mouths to be fed; and how these techniques filtered back up through the bureaucracies of death, forcing them to respond with diktats that would maintain a semblance of organizational continuity across these networks. and it’s interesting as well to consider the ways in which the productivist regimes that followed the war were, in a way, a continuation of certain aspects of the war: the organization and distribution of masses, the demarcation and development of resources sectors, the rationalization of social and physical landscapes within various frameworks of political and economic expansion and maximization. there are lots of interesting things to think about in this material. but ‘interesting’ isn’t the first or last feeling these pictures inspire. and, in fact, for all its fanatical detail, the book is strangely silent: very eloquent, but from a certain point of view there’s not much elaboration to be done.

i started to write this with a particular thought in mind, which i wrote a bit about before: whether it’s appropriate to use the language of world war two — ’genocide,’ ‘concentration camps,’ and so on — in the context of the wars in serbia and kosova. i had said that debating this point was silly, a form of classicism or scholasticism, and i got some pretty strong (and some pretty weak) responses, mostly offlist — and mostly from germany, btw. these messages talked for the most part about the ways in which this very heavy language serves to ‘justify’ NATO’s actions, to mobilize public opinion in favor of intervention, as a form of pseudo-historical propaganda, and so on.

from the relatively comfortable perspective of a city that wasn’t annihilated by world war two, and a population that ‘won’ the war, these questions seem pretty asbtract: a sort of internal monologue more concerned with meta-issues about contextualizing this war in historical trends — or, alternatively, refusing to allow it to be contextualized in specific ways that are a little too ‘useful.’ certainly, one hears ‘genocide’ and ‘concentration camp’ tossed around; but, frankly, i don’t see it serving to motivate widespread righteous support for the war effort. if anything, it seems quite halfhearted, exhausted, irrelevant. it’s inevitable that, over time, this language would lose its force; through fetishization and exactitude, or through overuse and sloppiness, it doesn’t matter, these words will lose old qualities and take on new ones. like anything else, this process will be uneven: the words will carry different meanings in new york, berlin, belgrade, warsaw, saint petersburg — or maybe develop new, ‘globalized’ ones in the media that span these terrains. but the notion that any one perespctive among these is a ‘first among equals’ and transcends the others in importance — well, it’s very interesting to think about the history of that kind of claim within these historical frameworks, isn’t it?

in any case, that too is a pretty academic debate, and the notion that efforts to intervene on the level of rhetoric are relevant is, i still think, pretty silly. a few days ago, several major US news organizations sent a ltter of protest to the pentagon, complaining that they were given more accurate information about NATO’s actions by the milosvic regime than by the pentagon. of course, this problem itself can’t be reported as ‘news’ in the US — but the letter can. it’s another circular debate, circumscribed by the assumptions of a national culture: in this case, that the US must be more ‘free’ than a media controlled by the milosevic regime, and therefore that the pentagon must live up to these national ideals. in deeply asymmetrical situations like this, notions like ‘propganda’ and ‘censorship’ are very clunky, because they cannot account for the meaning that a ‘fact’ will have in one environment or another. that the milosevic rehgime is broadcasting patriotic movies and omitting to mention its decade of murder is relevant insofar as it has utterly misled the vast mahjority of serbs into believing that their current sufferings are related to nothing, or to lies — this is icing on the cake. there’s no necessary connection between NATO’s attack on serbia and serbia’s attack on kosova — it may be predictable, butb there’s nothing mechanical about it. except, possibly, within the mythological world that the milosevic regime has beaten into serbian heads for a decade — just as most inhabitants of NATO countries cannot see any clear connections (or lack thereof) between the current war and the kurdish situations in turkey and iraq, or the events in afghanistan, in rwanda, the list goes on and on. one can parallel, compare, contrast, equate the current events with others past and present, argue whether they’re fundamentally new or fundamentally old, sudden eruptions or continuities; and it’s good to do so. but, really, what’s going on is legitimately vile without these referential structures. these commentaries read a bit like the placards draped around the necks of hanged corpses ‘explaining’ who they are and why they died. they may be true, they may be false, they may be propaganda, they may or may not further the destruction by fitting it neatly into a mythologized worldview. but they don’t change the fact of what they’re hanging on. so consider for a moment standing in an empty field on the outskirts of a village whose inhabitants are now suspended a few feet off the ground, swinging quietly in a chilly spring breeze, some of them within arm’s reach: and, if you will, take a mental walk around this scene, look at their swollen ankles and scuffed-up shoes. more than a few probable have stains on their knees and maybe a bit of blood dripping from here and there. to some people it matters very much who exactly each of these people are and who exactly killed them and why. but there’s a way in which these details really shouldn’t matter to most of us in the face of the general fact of what was and is happening. and if you don’t belive me, try describing their faces. but please excuse me for not wanting to hear your descriptions — i’ve seen enough this weekend to last me for quite a while.

ted

