---
yaml_begin: true
title: 2001-02-16 on dejanews and usenet archives a reply to drazen pantic
description: 
extract: 
created: 2024-11-17 17:08
updated: 2026-01-20 12:25
author: "tb"
images: false
order: 
enableToc: 
permalink: 
aliases: 

publish: 
date: 2001-02-16
tags:
  - data
yaml_end: true
---

To: nettime-l
Subject: Re: <nettime> Usenet archives sold, whay about README! ?
From: t byfield
Date: [Fri, 16 Feb 2001 11:24:41 -0500](https://nettime.org/Lists-Archives/nettime-l-0102/msg00178.html)

Drazen Pantic (Fri 02/16/01 at 09:17 AM -0500):

> Right. or a slightly more accurate, like the*first*author at al. In this particular case, nettime or nettime moderators credit might be less misleading.

`by and large, most commentaries on the digitalization of bibliography`
`are very positive: wider distribution of info, easier searching, more`
`sharing, etc., etc. (one notable exceptions that i know of was a 1994`
`article by nicholson baker that appeared in the *new yorker*; you can`
`see how much it was appreciated by poking around these links.[1]) but `
`you have hit on something interesting: ‘analog’ bibliography was much `
`more amenable to nonstandarized data. and *readme!*’s data isn’t nor-`
`mal at all--that’s why ultra-rationalized systems like amazon’s can’t`
`grok. ‘filtered by’ isn’t in their pulldown menus but ‘edited by’ is,`
`so their broken system gives excessive weight to josephine bosma. not`
`a big deal, imo.`

	[1] http://www.google.com/search?q=%22nicholson+baker%22+%22card+catalog%22+librarians

> The main issue still remains... Pushing things to the extreme, lets assume that cnn, fro example, decides to spam its viewers with past and *future* nettime messages and hands out an offer that is difficult to refuse. Hand offer to whom? To nettime moderators? And who decides what should be done?

`FYI, nettime does occasionally receive requests for permissions. these`
`are very straightforward: we refer them to whoever sent the message as`
`shown in the From: line (the Sender: line can be diff of course). this`
`is a very minimal approach, which mostly works fine, and even accounts`
`for the fact that an email address isn’t necessarily one person. there`
`are other benefits in handling it this way--for example, it avoids the`
`kind of expansionist mission creep that often happens when lightweight `
`functions get bureaucratized through, say, pushes to re-purpose stuff.`
`nettime’s footer *does* say it’s a moderated list; it doesn’t say that`
`the moderators are a rights clearinghouse.`

> I foresee that corporate media will soon start doing what corporate IT industry has done already. As IT companies have incorporated into itself lots of anarcho/hackers, networks will start handing out high $$ jobs to anarcho activists / practitioners /interventionists. What will make lists like nettime a real commodity. What then?

`systematic policies (for example, like rhizome adopted early on) tend `
`to privilege the categorical status of a message (‘content’) over the`
`more complex matrix of other info that’s generated by email; in doing`
`so, they also tend to continually reaffirm the centrality of the org-`
`anization as a fiduciary entity. this whole approach is totally back-`
`wards, imo: it produces a single point of control thus a single point `
`of failure. the fact that these kinds of terms are expressed in *law*`
`itself is proof positive of that fact: jurisprudence is by definition`
`a backward-glancing, formalized, and conservative approach the world.`
`so far, nettime’s hands-off approach has worked quite well. i haven’t`
`seen any need to change it. its weakness is a sort of P2P problem: to`
`do anything en bloc with the archives would require that everyone who`
`has contributed to the list assents, so such an effort would be mind-`
`bogglingly complex and inefficient. but that’s also its strength: the`
`rights, to the extent that they can even be pinned down, are distrib-`
`uted. as would be the responsibility to enforce those rights.`

`that doesn’t solve the potential problem of a situation in which net-`
`time’s moderators began to regard themselves as ‘spokespeople’ and/or`
`representatives. but that’s just corruption 101; there is no solution`
`for it. `

`cheers,`
`t`

